Hi It's Patrick Cox here and the last time we did a thing in the Paul cast about learning the
language of your enemy. It was about two sets of people who knew
virtually
nothing about each other's language and culture. The British
and the Japanese the British during World War two in a great panic.
Needed To Train Up a few people to learn Japanese because well
no one in
Britain understood Japanese they didn't understand what the enemy was
saying but in the pockets today it's the opposite a maybe a more
common situation. It's when you're right next door to your
enemy like in the Middle East Palestinians and
Israelis and when Palestinians learn Hebrew and Israelis learn
Arabic the not just learning the language of the
enemy the way they teach Arabic in the Army. It's actually for you know that
enemy in order for you to be able to stop the next explosion was an act that we always say
that you tend to forget that it's a
language that's also a part of a system which is alive and which
is something that has to do with
people she is very enthusiastic about learning Hebrew and when I asked her why she said
that in Gaza a lot of the cosmetic products the labels are in
Hebrew and she said she cats buying shampoo for dry hair and then she
would wash her hair and her hair kept coming out really bad and she knew that she was using
the wrong type of shampoo for her dry hair and now she knows Hebrew
and she go shopping and she looks at the label
of Israel and the territories and countries around it. These are places where people
have a huge amount in common they share habits and share recipes and share
music in this case a song sung in Arabic by three women of
Yemeni background has recently been a huge hit in
Israel. Yes.
Shana Sheely is a reporter who spent some of the last year in the Middle East She's also spent a lot of time
studying the history and culture of the Middle
East and of course she's come across many many points of cultural contact
between Israelis and Arabs.
Shayna has also met two linguists who study the quote
enemies language two guys who are. Authorities on each other's languages who
live just a few dozen miles away from each other one in Israel the other
in Gaza the Israeli linguist Arik said on
China first met him at Hebrew University in Jerusalem in two thousand and thirteen she
was studying for a master's degree in islamic a Middle Eastern
Studies and are Exadata was my Arabic
teacher and he was my first Arabic
teacher and just be clear he's Jewish right he is not an
Arab correct our accident is Jewish he has a really light skin and
he's tall and lanky he has long arms. Really like
green eyes and his cheeks are
rosy zone after if I had his son.
Here he is teaching an Arabic class in Jerusalem. He said on the research specialty is
Arabic so use of the subjective tense something he just happens to be one of the world's authorities
thought yeah he's this pretty nerdy
mamma said and chose to study Arabic in seventh grade. He was
lucky to have an inspirational teacher a man who Sudan says lived the
language he brought in John which is that which has Arabic
coffee and he drank a lot if not something like.
And everyone laughed and then he expected the laughter and said what I was laughing about. This is the
way Arabs train they enjoy coffee not like huge
youth after his first Arabic lesson the twelve year old Saddam made a toy out of plastic
googly eyes glued onto cardboard in a fuzzball he. It to his mother drawer a after
writing an inscription in two languages.
It will suck but he's me not that he'll halting
hable follow my mother always love butting out of
the well it's really unusual. Why an adult
the Dr says other family members and friends have to question his decision to study and
then make a career out of
Arabic. They know him that he can study what it's really like appeal
to physics mathematics.
They always say. So it's not their only optic Yes No
I told them that I know of
the not just the language but how it works. That's been Siddons interest.
And how close it is to his native tongue Hebrew the two languages share many root words
and follow similar grammatical patterns.
He chose the same way of thinking and it shows the way that
the people speaking these languages can be actually closer to each other
like the
languages Saddam says he was lucky to learn Arabic in the eighty's when Jews and Arabs had
more chances to meet now though the status of Arabic has changed. Although it's
an official language in Israel fewer Jewish Israelis study it Sudan believes
that Jews are turning their backs on a language that used to be central to their
culture thousand years ago Jews and Arabs work together
compared the Biblical scriptures.
Discuss things in Arabic.
If a person says that Arabic is a lousy language. It means that the heritage of
this person the Jewish person is also lousy because the Jewish heritage a great
percentage of
it is Arabic. So there's this strong connection Shayna
between Arabic and Hebrew just like he says but but fewer Hebrew speakers learning Arabic.
That seems amazing even in spite of all of the conflict Arabs and
Israelis have lived in each other's pockets for so long. So who
now in Israel is learning Arabic.
So by twelfth grade at the end of their education only three percent of
Israeli students take their matriculation exams in the subject so it's a very small group of people
who study Arabic in high
school and many of them choose to study Arabic because they want
to be placed in certain units during their mandatory army
service. That's interesting so with a trying to avoid active
duty Is that part of the deal here that you know they have the possibility of getting a desk job
instead if they learn
Arabic possibly and also a job in
intelligence or security in the Army is a little bit more prestigious than some of the other
jobs so that's also a possibility.
I spoke with many of our Saddam's current students in university all of them
started studying Arabic in high school with the motivation to do
Arabic in the Army but
now a lot of them have changed once you start studying Arabic in university. It's a
little bit different our exit and does not teach his students militarised
Arabic
he teaches more about the grammar and he teaches from
literary sources. He uses the Qur'an in his curriculum.
One of Sudan's students I spoke with his name is Yana tan. He's twenty
six and he started studying Arabic in high school so that he could be in
an intelligence unit during his army
service the way they teach make in the army is actually for know
that enemy in order for you to be able to stop the next explosion was an act that we
always say that you tend to forget that it's a
language that's also a part of a system which is alive and which
is something that has to do with
people after he finished his army service here in a town went to university and met Arabs in
Sudan syntax class and he
changed until that time I always thought of them as. The Arabs that hate
Jews and because I learned that there's a different our I saw the need
for me to learn the language and to see what they really think. And if they do think
badly of us then maybe I could influence them and can convince them otherwise.
That's the kind of attitude Saddam is trying to foster in his students. You can't be a
good linguist he says if your starting point is to stereotype groups of people.
I think it's important that an opinion which is really
racist is to say old you are or or Arabs
are it doesn't make sense in languages you can never say always it's like this or never it's like
this language isn't like life.
So Don can always get visas to travel to conferences abroad especially in parts of the Arab
world where Israelis are not welcome. Even experts on Arabic and he gets
that many Israeli Arabic speakers who look like him learned Arabic for security and intelligence.
So he understands that colleagues abroad may be suspicious of him but Saddam just wishes
more Israeli Jews would embrace this fascinating
language. I sometimes say is a joke or is a bad joke or
said joke that I only wish to Him to people in the Arab people would be
a bit close as that language is only ten percent because if the language
is at home in Israel to sit on says he sometimes feels intimidated.
I ask him how he feels intimidated
by my people are only Jewish people today
unlike ten or twenty or thirty years ago the Arabic language is considered
the language of the enemy and if you speak Arabic. It might be solely mean that you are part of
the enemy which is ridiculous.
Earlier this year Saddam made a presentation at a conference in Belgium. There was a
scholar there from Lebanon. The two bonded over what else language.
The Lebanese linguists found some ancient Hebrew manuscripts in a library in
Beirut Sudan helped him translate them and after that they. Vowed to stay in touch.
They exchanged e-mail addresses G. mail of course writing to each other's
institutional addresses might cause trouble.
They laughed about the underhand arrangement but it was a poignant
moment the recognition that even the most innocent trading of
linguistic ideas was subject to the rules of the Arab Israeli conflict.
I
well I guess it's good to hear that you know there are always ways of getting around these
these rather silly official impediments. But it really is crazy that
there are such impediments and I wonder Shana is it becoming worse is it becoming
more
difficult for our accident. To have these kinds of contacts with
his counterparts these linguists from the Arab world.
You know I don't really have a great sense of if it's becoming more difficult
for
Sadan I did speak with many of his Israeli colleagues who teach Arabic.
And many of them were concerned about the growing limitations force a
done as his career progresses an interesting thing when
I started doing this story and I go to journalism school so
I was pitching the story to classmates and professors and they always asked
me Well is he in the Mossad and I was like No he
just loves Arabic and they're like
really just to clarify the Mossad is the Israeli secret service.
Yes and I answer was of course not. Argh
Stan loves Arabic he wants to teach this language to bring people closer
together and everyone was like How do you know that. How do you know he's not in
Mossad and I think it's hard because people Israelis who study Arabic
who look like our exit on many of them. Do study for
intelligence and security so my sense is that it's
difficult for him but when he talks about it
he he's very humble he's pretty confident about his career he hasn't
run into any roadblocks yet and I think in a
way he understands that people are suspicious of him
and he uses his knowledge of the language
to repair those suspicions.
So that begs the question what about the other side what about
Arab academics Palestinian academics in particular
who have learned Hebrew who teach Hebrew. What about them.
So in Israel Gaza and the West Bank there are very few Palestinians who
teach Hebrew on an academic level when I started
this project. I set out to find our accidents counterpart.
I searched for Palestinians who are teaching Hebrew to Palestinians.
I have a friend her name is a beer. Ube. She's a journalist in
Gaza and she writes for some Israeli publications so I know that she
knows Hebrew so I asked her how she knows Hebrew or if she knows any Hebrew teachers
and she told me about so be Bihu so be battle is Gaza's
main Hebrew teacher. There are twelve Hebrew teachers in Gaza and so be
trained all of them.
He studied Hebrew at Tel Aviv University received a Master's degree in two
thousand and two he is the only Gazan to study Hebrew at Tel Aviv University.
He spoke about Hebrew in the same way that Sudan spoke about Arabic
which was this deep love of the language and of the patterns in the grammar and
the vocabulary which is so interesting to me because it's a language
and I'm battling which
is that's sort of the the counterpart
thing that's. I think I mean you say you're bad at languages it sounds like these two
linguists both kind of bad about. I don't know Korea choice
or you know facts on the ground. So they both seem to be sort of living
in this incredibly admirable world of
adoring the other's native tongue but on the other hand
it's fraught with difficulty as
well yeah definitely and so be battle.
He teaches so many Hebrew classes. He teaches private lessons
he teaches at a few universities in Gaza. And here's what Bihu will
says about his students who study Hebrew.
I encourage
all kinds of people of all
different categories and ages and colors political
I mean. I encourage all of them. Because if you understand
your enemy. It helps and
facilitate that mission. Never mind invention is
a
military or socially or if you
question if we are standing each others its word.
So so be both rule he developed Gaza's entire Hebrew curriculum so he
had friends in Israel who would send him the
Hebrew there called all pond books so his friends in Israel sent him those
books and by who built Gaza's Hebrew curriculum off of
these Israeli Hebrew books.
Now that's interesting and Israeli Hebrew books presumably are they
for outsiders or are they for Who are they aimed at there presumably not aimed
at Palestinians.
Right. So Israel's Hebrew cricket. It's for new immigrants to. Israel.
A lot of Americans Russians Whatever people who move to Israel who want to learn Hebrew.
So there's been a lot of research on these books and how. Not only do they
teach the Hebrew language but also try to instill a sense
of Israeli nationhood
identity
history and pride and some of the narratives included in those
books are not narratives that are accepted throughout the
world especially throughout the Arab
world and so will had to modify these books
to fit the narrative and Gaza. So that
people who are learning Hebrew wouldn't become outraged by what they are reading
for example he says that the Islamic and Biblical narratives of the Passover story are
different but one of the cool things about using Israeli Hebrew books is that
a lot of them have cultural
references. It's important to Buffalo but his students learn those cultural references.
He wants his students to know how to say Happy Holiday which is hugs the man
in Hebrew. He teaches his students how to say Shabat Scholem which is a greeting
said during the Sabbath in
Israel what about his students were kind of students want to
learn Hebrew you know why of a why are they learning it.
Yes So. When I met with but who in Gaza. I also met with nine of his Hebrew
students and they had a lot of different motivations some of them were
journalists
businessmen some of them wanted to learn Hebrew so that they could be
teachers and most of them also recognize the importance of knowing Hebrew
for
self-defense many Gazans may
have interactions with Israeli soldiers and many of them believe that
Hebrew can help them if they're in trouble so one of his students
whose name is Usher AFSPA Loesch he's forty and and he learned BASIC Hebrew
during his twenty one years and an Israeli
prison and now he studies behold to learn Hebrew more
formally when he was an. Prison he said that the Israelis
treated Palestinians not as if they were humans but as if they were bugs or
in
sex but in prison when he started to speak with his jailers and Hebrew he
said that something changed and they started respecting him and
they could talk about football and they could talk about things that they were watching on the T.V. and
it created a human relationship which did not exist
before
and Barlows recognizes the power of that and he wants
to arm Gaza and use with the skill. He said that he believes that
the level of hatred might go down if people talk to each other which I
think is the power of language that these two teachers
really
understand. Yeah that makes a huge difference. I mean the moment you can humanize a situation by
just being able
to speak the same language it's I mean it's a cliche but it really does seem
to work. I wonder if. If one who has come across this is well I mean
you mentioned that he started in Tel Aviv but since then he must have come
across as everybody who lives in Gaza does he must a come
across potentially violent confrontations
with Israeli guys in uniform.
Yet both will have this great story about this time during the second
intifada during which Israeli soldiers would come into
Gaza and they had a policy of cleaning up the streets and
asking local residents to pick their trash up off the floor
and to scrub graffiti from the
walls and buffalo had an interesting encounter with some of the soldiers he
was renovating his apartment and had all this trash outside of his house
because they were completely redoing it and the soldiers drove
by and started banging on the door and asking him you know whose house
is this whose trash is this
and I thought. To speak evil. Are you going to
go as you say just a minute do speak a bow to yes or speak you.
I am here both each of really you
know. Where did you learn how do you learn and therefore good the subject of this rubbish
on one of them the leader of the group he said OK you go and collect all of the people
and lead them to clean it and give
support and it led to this really funny
nice encounter which ultimately led to a lasting relationship in which
the soldiers came to his house and every time the soldiers were in the neighborhood
they'd come over and sit with bottle and drink coffee and chat in Hebrew.
Wow that's quite a story all made possible by a common language and
the signal that speaking that language
sense. Nowadays of course making that kind of connection is even
less possible. The Israeli soldiers A gone and they've also
sealed Gaza off from Israel. No conversations over T.V. between
Palestinian civilians in Gaza and Israeli
soldiers and even less likely contacts between civilians living in
Gaza and civilians in
Israel so Shaena do you know if these two linguists these two
guys who who live in these similar worlds across this divide. I wonder if they
know each
other they do not know each other as a naive
beginner journalist in the region my vision for this story was to do a
profile on each guy and then up and get them together and get them in conversation
and have them talk about their love for the language when I told people
about this idea. Once I was in Israel and once I was in Gaza.
People just laughed. It's not possible it's not possible for
them to know each other they can talk on the phone they can talk on Skype. But
right now it's impossible for. In Sudan to meet
face to face.
So it's not so much. I mean one would have thought that they under quote
normal circumstances they probably would know each other I mean they're both
leading linguists. But they don't know each other in
part you're suggesting because there just isn't any kind of
a forum for them to get to know each other for them to even
meet. There's no forum for them to me and there are also barriers
in place that prevents a gun from traveling into the West Bank or
Gaza and the who can no longer come in to Israel like he
did before two thousand and seven. So yeah there. He cannot come
into Israel.
So what about the students what about people in Gaza learning Hebrew
people in Israel learning Arabic can they make any kind of contact with each
other so and is from the Israelis who learn Arabic have
ample opportunities
to speak Arabic with native Arabic speakers in fact
many Jewish Israelis are native Arabic speakers they come from Arab
countries but many Israeli students who study Arabic
might be afraid of speaking Arabic because of the stereotypes
that exist in that
culture for Gazans it's a little bit of a different story there aren't many chances
to speak Hebrew with a real live Israeli but one of the great
things of course is Facebook a lot of the Hebrew students I spoke with
in Gaza said
that they have Facebook friends in Israel who they chat with in
Hebrew and one of the students I spoke with her name is jihad and she's in
her
forty's and she chats with me in Hebrew She also keeps her cell
phone in Hebrew.
It's sort of like the modern version of pen
pals pen pals Facebook. That's all people have. But if there's
one person who's really making the most of that side of us. As
it's Jihad that student of Hebrew Shayna just mentioned Shana originally met
her when she went to Gaza to interview Hebrew students.
She is very enthusiastic about learning
Hebrew and when I asked her why she talked about her hair and her skin.
She said that in Gaza a lot of the cosmetic products the labels are in Hebrew and the
ingredients are in
Hebrew and she said she kept buying shampoo for dry hair and then she
would wash her hair and her hair was horrible. It just kept coming out really bad.
And she was she knew that she was using the wrong type of shampoo for her dry
hair and she said she asked the
shopkeeper but she knows that the shopkeeper doesn't know Hebrew either so he was just making things
up off the top of his head. Now she knows Hebrew and she go shopping and she
looks at the labels and when there's a word on the label that she doesn't know she calls her Hebrew
teacher Bihu will and ask him to explain
it and she says you know we're ladies at the end of the day we're ladies
and she wants to buy the appropriate cosmetics for her hair and
skin Jehanne this woman during the interview we had to really like a
nice connection we laughed a lot. We laughed about the skin
products and then. After the interview once I was back in Israel.
She friended me on Facebook and you know what. Send me like funny like
hurt him. Oh geez and smiley faces and these nice messages and Hebrew about how it was so nice
to meet me and how like now we're we're friends and I felt like we were really
friends and then I clicked on her profile picture and saw that her
her cover photo was. Of a Hamas militant launching a custom
rocket and I had this like strange reaction of well.
Like what is this and I was living in Israel during the
war with Gaza in two thousand and thirteen and experienced running to
bomb shelters when there were sirens and
so that. Ends of fear has a really powerful
Reverb for
me and then I had this realization of
OK it's scary for me
to see a picture of someone launching a Kasam rocket.
But also it's probably scary for people in Gaza to see pictures
of Israeli soldiers holding an Israeli flag or walking on the street with her
and sixteen
and it sort of but meets have this realization
that there are a lot of people around the world who
throughout history have experienced that same fear and that same
threat and that that is what makes the efforts of Buffalo
and Sudan.
So powerful that they are able to overcome this fear
and
teach language in order to create
understanding and relationships also to protect and defend themselves like the
idea of defending and protecting your country is not a crime
a contradiction to to building human understanding and relationships and that the
two can exist
together
and share
the
dumb
thing
from
each
Shayna she spent part of this year in Israel with visits the occupied territories.
She's studying journalism as well as Arabic in the Middle East at U.C. Berkeley. You can see
some of us snapshots of Subby but who are excited and the students
at
P.R.I. dot org slash language. If you like this well then was hard
cause there are plenty more but all the usual places and at those usual places.
If you have a moment please write a review with the polka reviews mean
a lot.
Thank
you
can find us on Facebook at the world and page also on
Twitter at the lingo Pod. I'm also on Twitter at
Patrick Cox P A R I C O X. Thanks for listening will be
back
soon found work sound works from P.R.
I.